Have you ever waited around for a pip to do its thing
while installing packages or syncing virtual environments
or even through some higher level tools such as pip tools?
Then you'll be very excited to hear about
what just got announced from Astral,
a pip compatible CLI tool called UV.
It's like pip, but a hundred times faster.
Charlie Marsh from Ruff fame
and the founder of Astral is here to dive in.
Let's go.
This is "Talk Python to Me" episode 453
recorded March 12th, 2024.
(upbeat music)
Welcome to "Talk Python to Me"
a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon where I'm @mkennedy
and follow the podcast using @talkpython
both on mastodon.org.
Keep up with the show and listen to over seven years
of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
We've started streaming most of our episodes
live on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel
over at talkpython.fm/youtube
to get notified about upcoming shows
and be part of that episode.
This episode is sponsored by Neo4j.
It's time to stop asking relational databases
to do more than they were made for
and simplify complex data models with graphs.
Check out the sample FastAPI project
and see what Neo4j native graph database can do for you.
Find out more at talkpython.fm/neo4j.
And it's also brought to you by us
over at Talk Python Training.
Did you know that we have over 250 hours of Python courses?
Yeah, that's right.
Check them out at talkpython.fm/courses.
Hey all, I have a quick announcement
before we jump into the conversation with Charlie
and sticking with the theme of the episode,
I'll keep it quick.
Over at Talk Python, we just released a new free course.
It's all about working with audio in Python,
converting it to text,
applying all sorts of AI awesome sauce and more.
We end up with a dynamic web app
that lets you have a ChatGPT style Q&A
with a podcast, guests and hosts
starting from just the RSS feed.
It's really mind blowing.
As a sweet bonus, the course shows you
a bunch of hands-on examples of FastAPI,
HTMX, Beanie, MongoDB and more.
I hope you love it.
Give it a look as it is 100% free, no strings attached.
The link is on the episode page,
in your podcast player show notes
and at talkpython.fm/courses.
Hey Charlie.
- Hey.
- Welcome.
- Yeah, thanks so much for having me back on the show.
I really appreciate it.
- Yes, it's really great to have you back on the show.
You and your team are doing awesome work these days
and making a big dent in Python.
- Thank you, thank you.
Hopefully a good dent, I guess.
(laughing)
- Yeah, I guess you could make a good dent or a bad dent.
But no, I meant that in a good way.
Definitely in a good way.
- I appreciate it.
- Yeah, yeah, I think excellent work.
It's really, it's kind of surprising
how some of these tools just come in
and just catch fire in a way.
I don't know how you felt about it,
but it seemed more than I would have expected.
I mean, I did not expect your things to be popular,
but they became really popular really quickly.
(laughing)
- Yeah, yeah, I mean, it was different with Ruff and with UV.
This sort of context around it has been pretty different
because with Ruff, like when I started working on Ruff,
no one knew who I was or had any reason
to care about what I was doing.
And the project just grew over time.
And then I knew that when we were working on UV,
there would just be a lot more of an expectation
around like anything we build.
- Yeah, the spotlight was already shining, right?
- A little bit, yeah, yeah.
And that's awesome 'cause it means our stuff gets traction.
Also, it comes with a lot of responsibility.
It means anything we release,
we're kind of committed to maintaining.
So like, it's been very interesting,
like this kind of release cadence
versus what happened with Ruff.
- Well, you have more people behind the scenes
helping you out, right?
- I do, yeah, thankfully.
- Yeah, tell us, maybe that's a good place
to just kick off our conversation is,
you know, we're talking a bit about Ruff for everyone,
but in Ruff was the thing that really launched all of this,
but you started a company, Astral,
got some funding behind it, building awesome tools.
Yeah, just give people the broad view
of your world these days.
- Yeah, totally.
So yeah, I started, this all started when I released Ruff
probably like a year and a half ago, maybe at this point.
And at that point it was really not just a side project
for me, but very much an exploratory project.
Like I was kind of curious about building
faster Python tooling really,
and curious about getting better at Rust
and all this stuff.
And Ruff, when I released it, it's, you know,
it was a lint or it is a linter,
but it kind of brings a lot of different tools together.
So if you're familiar with like Flake 8 or Pylint,
but also Black, Ruff is designed to kind of bundle
all those tools together.
So it can detect problems with your code,
it can fix them automatically, it can reformat your code.
So often when we see people like adopting Ruff,
they're replacing like 20 or 30 tools with Ruff.
And, you know, it has, there's a bunch of nice things
about it, but ultimately it's very, very fast
and hopefully a lot simpler for users.
- Yeah. - But, go ahead.
- I was gonna say, it's really nice that it's just,
one tool that brings that all together.
You know, it's not a patch where,
well, here's how we use isort,
and here's how we use Flake 8,
and here's how we use this,
and here's how we use that, you know?
- Right, I think isort's a really good example,
because instead of having a, and isort's a great tool,
but instead of having a separate tool
to do your import sorting,
Ruff frames import sorting as just a lint rule.
And so you don't have to learn a bunch of different tools
and figure out how to sort of merge them together.
And, you know, Ruff, again, when I released it,
it was just a side project.
And it sort of took off, you know, there were,
it was originally, you know, I released it in part
because I had this thesis that like Python tooling
could be much faster, and Ruff was meant to evidence that.
It was meant to be an example of what I saw
as like this potential to build
really different Python tooling.
And took off a couple big projects,
like FastAPI and such were kind of early adopters,
and it just grew and grew and grew from there.
And I started a company, Astral, you know,
shortly after based on a lot of these ideas.
So again, Ruff in this context was meant to be,
you know, the goal wasn't necessarily to start a company
just based around Ruff.
The goal was to start a company based around,
you know, the ideas behind Ruff,
which is can we build really different Python tooling by,
well, it's all written in Rust.
It's sort of an implementation detail, right?
But ultimately what we're trying to do is build
like really high performance Python tooling,
but also tooling that works together really well
and simplifies things.
So tackle, it's not just about performance.
It's also about tackling a lot of,
I guess what I see as the complexity in Python tooling today
and really trying to, I guess, challenge
certain status quos and respect others,
but challenge some status quos
in what it feels like to work with and use Python.
And so, you know, our focus as a company,
you know, right now we're very, very focused
on our open source roadmap and our open source tooling.
So that's Ruff, now UV, which we'll talk about in a bit.
And these are, you know, MIT licensed, you know,
fully open source tools that we build.
And ultimately our goal is to build and sell paid services
that integrate really well with the tooling
and are kind of like the natural next thing you need
when you're building with Python.
So, you know, we'll never charge money
for like the tools themselves,
those remain free permissively licensed.
But our goal is to kind of build, you know,
imagine you're building with Python,
you need to deploy a web server.
There's a lot of things that you need naturally to do that.
So for people who are already using our tools,
what are the natural next things they need
and how can we build really good services
on top of the tooling
that just integrate with it really well?
So that's kind of the premise of the company.
There's like really two focuses to the roadmap.
It's like the open source and the commercial.
And our goal is to have an incentive structure
where we're just continuously aligned
to like invest a ton in the open source
and grow it as much as possible in a really natural way.
- So you're not gonna do like per line fix pricing.
You get a million line fixes a month free
and then, no, just kidding.
I think it's an awesome model.
And, you know, open source 10 years ago,
it really looked, it was already super vibrant
and super making huge dents in the space, right?
Really a lot of people adopting it.
But I think there was kind of a funding side
that was a little bit missing.
I still remember like, you know,
buy me a coffee type of links,
like send me 10 bucks if you like this.
And that's just, it's not a job.
That's hardly a hobby type of thing to get stuff done.
You can't have a team of people focused on it.
And it had traditionally really been around
kind of a beneficial, I need to find a big tech company
that's willing to give me sufficient amount of time
to work on this project to sort of fund its existence.
Or maybe I'm a consultant and I create Flask,
but I consult on Flask, that type of thing, right?
And I think it's just super positive
to see more direct ways people
are making open source successful.
You know, I think-
- Yeah, I appreciate that.
And I wish, you know, I sort of wish
that there were more good examples of that working.
There are some for sure.
You know, for me, it was pretty clear.
Like it was immediately clear to me
I needed to be working on a rough full time
if I wanted the project to succeed.
And that's kind of a microcosm of the bigger challenge,
which is like we wanted to build,
like we really wanted to like professionalize
the building of this, you know, the work on this project
and bring in more people to help build it.
And so, you know, ultimately it's not,
obviously it's not charity.
It is venture funding.
And ultimately we need to build a business,
you know, around the tooling to make it,
you know, to make it sustainable.
But, you know, again, for me,
I want the incentive structure to be such that like
the open source is obviously free,
open source, extremely permissively licensed,
and truly open source.
Like we have tons and tons of contributors.
We have a huge community around it.
And I'm just glad that we've been able
to bring in more people to kind of supercharge
the development of it all.
So yeah, so I guess you talked on this before,
but we're now eight people.
So we've grown, you know, it was,
I guess a year ago it was just me in March.
So over the past, yeah,
our first two team members joined actually in March
of last year, so almost exactly a year.
And yeah, we're completely distributed.
So we're, you know, we have people in US Pacific time
all the way to Bangalore.
So we're just, you know, around the like open source,
like we're kind of all over the world
and just building, you know,
building all this stuff out in the open.
- It's such a good fit to be a distributed company
as an open source with open source roots,
because the tools of open source,
in some degree for software in general,
but especially for open source is asynchronous,
semi-connected, you know, kind of the Zen of get,
but for the way you work, right.
And it makes it super easy to hire
just the most engaged people, regardless of where they are.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Rather than the people who are willing to commute
to my office in the office park.
- Yeah, it was, I would be pretty surprised
if a single person I've hired
would have been willing to move to New York,
which is where I'm based.
So from that perspective, it was a no brainer, which is,
and actually, you know, multiple people we've hired,
our relationship with them started on the repo.
- Yeah.
- In rough itself.
And then almost everyone we've hired,
we discovered through open source in some way
or had some relationship through open source in some way.
- Yeah.
- So yeah, it's been a really, it's very much in,
it's also very much in the DNA of the company,
which is, you know, we actually also intentionally try
to hire people who have been maintainers, right?
And have a lot of experience with that too.
We view that as a really important skill.
- Yeah, that's excellent.
So we talked about rough.
One thing I do wanna give a bit of a shout out to is,
I don't remember, I think I found this on Mastodon,
I can't remember where somebody talked about it,
but one of the things that rough does,
one, it changes code, which is awesome.
I love your rough format story,
but it also just tells you, hey, this could be better.
You're violating PEP 8,
you're violating this other convention
or even a security thing, right?
But the why of that,
I think requires a little bit of experience.
Like, why should I use this kind of loop
or that kind of comprehension over another, right?
People told me that who are much better
have been doing this longer, I shouldn't do it.
Why?
When you have 700 rules, there's a lot of why.
And so you guys came up with this thing
at docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules,
put in links that literally for each one of these
has like a little example and what is good and what is bad
and when you should use it and so on.
You wanna just tell people about this a bit?
I think it's a massive--
- Yeah, totally.
So we didn't have, I mean, we obviously didn't have this
when we started the project
and then we accumulated a lot of rules.
When we decided to add this,
I think we already had like hundreds of rules
and the motivation for the format really comes from Clippy,
which is the linter used in Rust.
- Okay.
- And they have really,
Rust in general has a really good documentation culture
and Clippy has this nice format, very similar to ours.
We've made some adjustments,
but it's pretty similar around how you document lint rules,
like what's the motivation and giving examples.
And so we were like, all right, let's, we wanna do this.
And we just over a very long period of time
and a lot of contributors contributed on this documentation,
but it took like six months or something probably
to document it all. - I can imagine.
- And now, yeah, now we can,
now we require it for all rules.
So it's much easier to add going forward,
but it was a huge effort to add this.
And some of the explanations too are very extensive
and detailed with lots of references.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I pulled the one up for isort, unsorted imports,
which is error I001.
And it also talks about whether it can automatically fix it,
what this does, why is it bad?
So it says things like consistency is good.
Use a common convention for imports
to make your code more readable and idiomatic or Pythonic.
And it just gives an example, bad, good.
- Right, right.
- I think that's nice.
- Yeah, and we've started to put more stuff in here
over time too, like whether, like in some cases,
we let users apply automatic fixes
that aren't completely safe, like by opting in,
like it might change the meaning of your code
and you kind of need to be careful.
And so over time, we've started to document that here too,
like rules that have unsafe fixes, why?
Like in what case might it break your code
and what should you look out for?
So yeah, we want it to be a tool with really good,
like we're kind of inspired by Rust in this way
'cause Rust has a really good documentation culture
and also the Rust like compiler itself
has really good error messages.
It's sort of famous for that.
Like when your code doesn't work,
it's really good at telling you why.
Doesn't always get it right,
but it has famously good error messages.
And that's something that we try and channel too,
to like when we make changes to configuration,
like just putting extra effort into trying to make
like those like error messages and those hints helpful.
But yeah, it's a lot of work.
So I appreciate that you called it out.
- I'm sure it looks like a lot of work,
but it's one of those things that's,
where else are you gonna get this knowledge, right?
I mean, I know you can go search for one at a time,
but in this aggregate, this is really good.
- Right, right, right.
This portion of Talk Python to Me
is brought to you by Neo4j.
Do you know Neo4j?
Neo4j is a native graph database.
And if the slowest part of your data access patterns
involves computing relationships,
why not use a database that stores those relationships
directly in the database,
unlike your typical relational one.
A graph database lets you model the data
the way it looks in the real world,
instead of forcing it into rows and columns.
It's time to stop asking a relational database
to do more than they were made for
and simplify complex data models with graphs.
If you haven't used a graph database before,
you might be wondering about common use cases.
You know, what's it for?
Here are just a few.
Detecting fraud, enhancing AI, managing supply chains,
gaining a 360 degree view of your data
and anywhere else you have highly connected data.
To use Neo4j from Python,
it's a simple pip install Neo4j.
And to help you get started,
their docs include a sample web app
demonstrating how to use it both from Flask and FastAPI.
Find it in their docs or search GitHub
for Neo4j movies application quick start.
Developers are solving some of the world's
biggest problems with graphs.
Now it's your turn.
Visit talkpython.fm/neo4j to get started.
That's talkpython.fm/neo, the number four and the letter J.
Thank you to Neo4j for supporting Talk Python to Me.
So Ruff will fix a lot of these things for you.
And one of the things that I like to do
is I just have it integrated into my editor these days.
So both with PyCharm and with VS Code,
if I just say format this document, that's Ruff format.
- Nice.
Yeah, yeah.
So we have a VS Code extension
and it supports formatting, auto fixing,
all that kind of stuff.
- The PyCharm one's a,
JetBrains one's a third party one, right?
Someone else decided to make that?
- Yeah, the JetBrains one is by Udai.
And it's, yeah, that's like a community extension.
We're considering doing our own at some point
because there's a lot of demand for,
obviously we have a lot of users who use
the JetBrains stuff.
I mean, I use it.
So we may do it and do our own at some point,
but there's a community maintained one right now.
And that's based on,
we have a sort of like a language server.
So there's kind of like an underlying piece of technology
that wraps Ruff that powers all of these editor integrations.
So like, you can also use that from like NeoVim
or like Sublime Text or Emacs,
like all of those editors support the LSP.
And so you can actually,
it's the same thing that powers the VS Code extension,
just that's wrapped in some VS Code specific stuff,
but like it's the same piece of technology.
And we're actually rewriting that right now
to make it sort of like more natively integrated into Ruff,
which will let us do some cool things.
So it should get like actually significantly better,
I think over the course of this year,
'cause it's becoming more and more of a priority for us.
- Yeah, cool.
The whole LSP thing is pretty interesting.
I think it's really opened up
a lot of editors being better.
- Yeah, it has.
And it made it like from our perspective,
it made it way easier to build like editor integrations
because we just built an LSP
and then it like works for like everyone almost.
- Yeah.
- Like the JetBrains stuff, it does support the LSP,
but I think only in the paid version,
not in the community version.
So like there's some limitations around it,
but in general, like if you support the LSP,
like it's actually very easy to build editor integrations
that work with everyone, which is like super, super useful.
- Yeah, sort of rebuilding your own integration
for every single thing, which is not fun.
- Yeah, it's a lot.
- All right.
Well, let's talk about the main project here.
The main reason for being here today is UV.
Tell people what UV is.
This is your next big project, next big tool.
- Yes, yeah.
UV, we released UV a little under a month ago.
And this is something that I've wanted to do,
like basically since we started the company,
I wanted to start,
I thought there was an opportunity
to build some really interesting tooling
in Python packaging.
And UV is kind of the first milestone in that.
So UV in its current form,
it's designed as a sort of drop-in alternative
to pip, pip tools, like if you use pip compile,
pip sync and virtualenv.
So it takes those three tools
and tries to bundle them into one.
And so it can do things like,
given a set of input requirements,
generate a requirements.txt file,
similar to what you'd get from pip compile.
It can, you can do UV pip install -r requirements.txt,
UV pip install black.
So it's really intended right now to be a sort of,
it won't always,
we don't support absolutely 100% of what pip does,
but it's, we try to be pretty close.
And so in many cases,
the intention is that people can basically drop in UV
in their project that uses pip today
and get in many cases,
like very, very significant performance improvements.
So similar to rough,
like some of the goals we had for this project were one,
it should be very, very fast.
And UV, it's really fast.
In particular, there's like a benchmarks.md in here,
actually, if you want to click on that.
Now scroll up.
- Does that do it?
- Oh yeah, that works too, I guess.
That was smart of me.
Yeah, so it's really, really fast,
especially if you've already have,
if you're, if you have things cached,
which is pretty common.
So like often on your machine,
when you're doing like pip install -r, whatever,
a lot of those packages,
you've probably installed them at least like once before
on your machine,
or maybe you deleted your virtual environment
and you're recreating it with the exact same dependencies
or something like that.
UV is like very, very well optimized for that case.
So if you have a package
that you're installing multiple times,
like the installation is effectively free.
And it's also a lot more like disk space efficient.
We use kind of like,
we store all of them in one place
and kind of copy them into your virtual environment
so that you don't have like many,
many different copies of the package too.
So this was all kind of taking techniques
and inspiration from like other ecosystems
and other package managers
and kind of molding them to fit Python's model
for how packaging and dependencies work
and all the specifications.
And so again, the end result is like you,
installing into a virtual environment,
a package that you've already installed before
is basically free.
And yeah, a lot of these things are just like way,
way, way faster.
Similar to rough like-
- Dramatically faster, yeah.
- Yeah, and similar to rough like-
- Dramatically, and I think, you know,
it's worth pointing out that like on one hand,
we all have an extra 10 seconds, right?
Or whatever. - Of course.
- But in the aggregate,
all of these things are just like little paper cuts
over your day, you know?
And so, yeah, sure, I can format the code
and I could use something nice
and sure if it takes 20 seconds, okay.
But then you stop running it
'cause it's kind of a hassle and you're just,
you're in your flow.
And this is kind of the same way.
It's like, oh, I wanted maybe see if there's a new,
some new packages for this project
as I'm sitting down to work on it.
Like, okay, well, wait for a pip compile to run
and you wait and you wait and then like,
okay, now it's done onto the development version
and you wait and you wait.
And like, you know, it's just some of these things
that are instant.
- Just ask the question more
and it just doesn't break your train of thought, you know?
- Totally.
I think there's like, maybe like three different things
that come to mind here when we think about performance.
'Cause like, yeah, okay, in this case,
like it may not seem to change your life
if you're going from one second to, you know,
50 milliseconds.
But I think three things come to mind.
So one, like for companies and large projects,
this can actually be like a really big difference.
And so if you're at a company
and you have like a big monorepo
with like a bunch of different sub projects
and they all have requirements files
and you wanna bump a dependency,
that can be like, at that point you're talking
like 15 plus minutes for a command.
And so like, the larger the project gets,
obviously the more performance matters
and the more it helps out.
And we're trying to build tooling that can basically scale,
I don't know about like to arbitrarily large projects,
but like to large projects and useful for companies too.
You know, the other thing I'd say is
I think there's something that happens like when tools,
when you make something like way faster,
it just changes a lot of the ergonomics
around what it's like to do things.
And so, you know, in this case, like, okay,
so installing into a virtual environment,
a package that you've already installed before
is free now.
And so how does that change things?
It's nearly instant.
So how does that change things, right?
So that means like, if you mess up your virtual environment
and have to delete it and recreate it,
it doesn't cost you anything.
It's totally ephemeral.
You can throw it away and recreate it at any time.
And like, that's just like a different,
like it sounds small,
but that's kind of like a different relationship
to a virtual environments than before,
where it's like, okay, I created the virtual environment now.
Oh no, my virtual environments have messed up.
I got to recreate it.
Like we want to just change a lot of the dynamics
around some of those like abstractions.
And then the other thing is this performance budget
or this, if you think of performance like a budget,
this buys us a lot of room.
And so like the fact that we are so fast
on some of these things means that we can do things
that otherwise might be like prohibitively slow.
And this is more sort of forward-looking and for the future.
Like one thing that we're thinking about a lot right now
is this idea of like resolving Python dependencies
for many platforms, because it's a little bit complicated,
but you know, pip compile and pip and UV,
they're really designed to only work on like
the current Python platform
and the current Python that you're using.
So if you're on like macOS and you run pip compile,
or UV pip compile, it will give you dependencies
that are correct for like macOS
and your current Python version,
but they might be wrong on Windows because Python,
in Python you can have dependencies that vary based
on things like the current Python version
or the current operating system.
- Yeah, so one example would be a UV loop, right?
For people who are trying to speed up.
- I think it doesn't work on Windows.
- It doesn't work at all on Windows, that's right.
And so.
- Yeah, so that's a very common one.
- Yeah.
And it is, I think very common that this hap,
that, you know, this is a very common thing,
like on like lots of really, really popular packages
have these kinds of marker.
These were called markers,
which basically makes the dependencies conditional
based on the current Python.
And so, you know, like again, like in pip and pip tools,
UV right now just locks for the current Python.
Poetry and I think PDM, but poetry for sure
does this very interesting thing
where they actually try to lock,
they try to resolve for like all possible platforms.
And that's something, it's really convenient
because it means that like you kind of do one lock
and then any user anywhere can like use that and it works.
And it's kind of like guaranteed to be right
as opposed to maybe it doesn't work on Windows
or whatever else.
And so we're pretty interested in like that,
adding that behavior
and that's gonna be like more expensive.
And so if we have something that's really fast right now,
it kind of like opens up a design space
of interesting things we can do to solve that problem
while still being, you know, very fast.
So that's kind of how I think about performance.
Like I think people like a little bit underrate
how much of an impact it can have
on even small interactions.
'Cause once you try something that's much faster,
it's often hard to go back to the other thing.
But I'm glad you've had that experience at least.
- Yeah, absolutely.
A couple of interesting comments.
Dane says, "If it takes 10 seconds,
"I go to triage that issue on GitHub
"and come back five minutes later."
Right, like that's kind of where I was getting at
with the flow stuff.
It's like, okay, I'm ready to go.
Mind wonders and you're kind of like starting over.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- And then Henry out in the audience also says,
"Hey Henry," it says,
"It also, this doing things so quickly,
"it encourages good environment usage
"because if doing things the right way
"is just as easy and as fast as doing it the wrong way,
"you might as well do it the right way."
- That's a nice thought.
That's a nice thought.
- Yeah, it is.
- Yeah, I mean, I think there's,
yeah, there are certain things though
where like we aren't any faster
and I'm interested in thinking about like those
and what we can do about them.
Like a common one or the most obvious one is
in Python sometimes when you install a dependency,
you might have to build it from source.
And in Python, you often are installing things like NumPy,
which have include some native code.
And so actually turning that into something
that your system can run is kind of expensive.
And you typically don't have to think about this with NumPy
because they ship what are called wheels,
which are kind of like these pre-compiled artifacts.
But not all packages ship wheels.
You could be on a platform that doesn't have a wheel
for a variety of reasons.
You might get the raw NumPy source code
and then have to,
you get the raw NumPy source code
and then have to compile it down into a build distribution.
And like for us, if we get into that situation,
it's like not gonna be any faster
because like we still have to build the thing from source.
Like just like that.
- That's the slowest part of the whole process.
- Yeah, and so there's like some,
you know, there are some cases and some bottlenecks
where like it's, I'm kind of thinking about
how could we do even better there?
And there are actually things that are changing
in the standards that have made this a little easier.
Like there's this new thing called metadata 2.2.
It sounds cool, I know.
It basically lets you like read the metadata.
- You like metadata 2.1.
- Yeah, if you, yeah, I'm on,
yeah, we're actually on 2.3 now.
- I just get it.
- But the point of that is like,
it's a standard that makes it so
you don't have to build the thing as often.
Like if you just wanna know the metadata of NumPy,
for example, you may no longer need to build it
and before you did.
And so the standards are moving in a helpful direction here,
but I just thought I'd call it out
because like the source distribution,
there are cases where it won't be faster
and I'm pretty interested in those,
but people should know that they also exist.
- There's also, it's not just time,
there's also security issues around that, right?
If things are still based on building source from source
and then running the setup py to see what the metadata is,
it's both slow and also potentially running arbitrary code
just to install a thing, which can make you,
I mean, I don't know, rarely has anything gone wrong
with just installing and running arbitrary code
off the internet, but sometimes it could go wrong.
- Yeah, it would be nice to get to a world
where that's not required
or at least for dependency resolution
and like the standards are moving in that direction.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, you might, if you're gonna use it,
you're gonna have to get it,
but if you just wanna know,
well, what versions do I need
to put these two things together?
You shouldn't have to do that.
- Yeah, exactly.
Because today for NumPy, for example,
if you didn't have a wheel,
you would have to run some arbitrary code
to ask it for its dependencies.
- Yeah, exactly.
Well, let's talk about some of the usages here.
Let's see some more interesting comments in the chat.
We'll get back to them.
First of all, is it like Highlander, the movie,
should there just be one?
Is this, is UPI a thing that I put into,
say my requirements file if I wanna use it
or do I install it just once for my machine?
Like what's the scale?
- Yeah, so there's a lot of different ways.
You can, there's a lot of different ways to install it.
You definitely can install it into a virtual environment.
My general recommendation would be to install it
on your machine once,
because an interesting thing about UV
is you don't need Python to install it.
And it doesn't have,
you need to have Python on your machine
because we need to be able to, for example,
build source distributions
or know where to install the thing, right?
We have to install into a virtual environment
somewhere.
And so you have to have Python installed on your machine,
but UV does not depend on Python.
So like it can install into arbitrary virtual environments
or into arbitrary other Python interpreters.
So that's why we generally recommend
using like the,
these standalone installers that we have at the top
of the snippet on the screen.
They're like the curl and the PowerShell invocations.
Those will install a binary,
a single binary on your machine that's UV.
And from there you can use UV to install
into virtual environments that it creates,
to install into your system Python, to do whatever.
So like I would say most people,
based on the statistics,
based on our download statistics,
most people still install UV with pip,
which makes sense,
which is not that surprising to me.
But I would generally recommend having like one UV install
on your machine.
Although if you do install into a virtual environment,
like that's also totally fine.
Like nothing's gonna go wrong.
It's just not completely necessary
because a single UV can already install
into that virtual environment.
- Right.
You're never going to import UV.
- No. - I mean, you might,
but in general, people are not going to.
- I think you can.
I'm trying to think what would happen.
(laughs)
- It's not like,
like things like pytest and other things.
A lot of times there could be just one of those,
but then you wanna use fixtures
and you need to import something out.
So then it really needs to be in the virtual environment
and accessible like a library.
But this is just something you run
maybe even before your codes,
before your virtual environment exists, right?
Like it really kind of does ideally exist outside it,
I think.
- Yeah, ideally it exists outside of it.
And there are some cases where you'd wanna install it
within the virtual environment,
but ideally it exists outside of it.
The other thing that's nice
about using the standalone installers,
like at the top here is,
soon we're gonna ship like a self update command.
So you can do like UV self update
and it will update UV to the latest version.
And we can't really support that
if you install it with a different package manager
like pip or Brew.
Those have their own upgrade commands obviously,
but like if you install it with our installer,
then like we can control the upgrades and stuff like that
and provide some other features.
So that's generally what we recommend,
but obviously we're always gonna support
like installing with pip and stuff too.
- Yeah, I'm all about PipX these days.
I really like--
- Yeah, we're PipX, that's mine.
- Yeah, yeah, PipX really,
you can just say up, kind of like Brew,
you can say upgrade all my Python CLI tools,
PipX upgrade all.
Basically I find rough and UV is just,
you guys are moving super fast
and there's frequently an update.
- There are often updates, yeah.
Yeah, and then the UV interface,
like it's meant to be pretty familiar to,
or it's meant to be, I guess,
hopefully very familiar to people who have used,
who are already using pip and other tools.
And so like UVVM creates a virtual environment.
And then there's, we have this sort of pip sub command.
So like UVPip install Flask,
and that doesn't call or use pip in any way.
We're just using pip here to convey
what the interface looks like.
And part of the motivation there is at some point
in the future, we probably wanna add a new interface to UV
that's a little bit more high level.
So you could think of something like Poetry,
where they have like Poetry install,
they have this sort of higher level interface
for interfacing with packages.
We wanna do something like that.
And so that's why we left the top level
of the interface clear,
because we might kind of like integrate and,
sorry, innovate and like ship a bunch of stuff
that would otherwise break this interface.
So like by putting this stuff under Pip,
we basically created this like isolated space
where we can make sure that those commands
like keep working no matter what we choose to change
in the future.
And it's very similar to Pip's interface, right?
It's like pip install, then it could be a package name.
It could be a dash R requirements file.
We support editable installs.
We support like URL dependencies,
get dependencies, all that kind of stuff.
- Right, all the stuff you might normally do,
Pip install something for the most part, that's the same.
- Yep, yeah, exactly.
And we support a lot of the same flags too
that like pip supports.
So like --index URL,
--extra index URL,
like --no binary, like all that stuff.
Like we've put a lot of,
we don't support every flag,
but we've put a lot of effort into supporting a lot of them.
And we've added more over time.
Like now we support like --no build isolation
and stuff like that,
that maybe most listeners have never even had to look at,
but like, yeah, these things matter
in some circumstances.
And so like over time,
our goal is to add like more of the interface.
But, you know, I would say for common use cases,
I would expect that it just works.
Like just adding UV up front,
like it should just work.
Now as you become more complex,
it won't and you'll run into some.
We have a whole document of like subtle ways that we deviate
some are intentional,
some I consider bugs, right?
Like some we want to fix over time.
But the intention is that for most people,
we want it to just work.
- Once we fix the first round of bugs
following the release, of course.
- Yeah, yeah, sure.
So you've got a UV, VENV, VIMP
for creating a virtual environment.
And it has a lot of the flags that Python dash MVNV
would have where you can say, you know,
bring along pip or upgrade things or set the prompt name,
that kind of stuff, right?
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Yep.
- Similar for UV pip and then stuff.
What I find I do for most of my work,
at least if I'm not trying to teach or do a presentation
where people are like, what did you just do?
These all have kind of aliases, right?
Like UV pip install -r requirements on TXT is just PIR,
PIP install requirements, you know, things like that.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- And so try to just take the common stuff
and it doesn't matter if it's pip or UV really backing it
from my CLI ergonomics, right?
I'm just, I use my alias.
And if I want to change that, I just go and edit it.
And so for me, it was super easy to switch
to adopt these things because I'm like,
I added my ZSH RC file once and now everything just,
I just do the same stuff and it works,
but the new way, way faster.
- Yeah, and you know, the goal of like pip compatibility
has been interesting because there are actually like
some things that we very intentionally want to do
differently and like, I won't speak for the pip maintainers
like, but I think in some cases,
there are probably things that they would do differently too
if they could.
- I think so too, yeah.
- Yeah, 'cause like PIP, I mean, PIP's number one,
PIP is extremely important and its number one goal is like,
it needs to be like robust, right?
It needs to keep working and it needs to be compatible
and 'cause it's like, it's truly like the cornerstone
of like a lot of the Python ecosystem.
And so PIP, it's very, it's harder for them to change things
especially in a breaking way.
And they have to be really thoughtful
and do that over a long period of time.
And so we're in kind of a privileged position, honestly,
because we come in with a new tool,
we can actually do a bunch of,
choose to do things differently.
And some people get upset about it obviously,
'cause they're like, this isn't exactly how pip does it.
I'm trying to hold firm on some of those things
and also be open-minded on others, right?
But like, you know, like one thing that we do
that's different, that's, I guess maybe it's not evident
from this screen exactly, or I guess it sort of is.
So when you do UVVM, we default the name .vm.
So like, if you don't provide a name,
we just default to .vm.
And there was a PEP to make that a standard
that got pulled back, but like,
it's not like we're trying to make it a standard,
but I just think it's a good default.
Like we want to abstract away some of this stuff.
And so you can just like have a virtual,
you can obviously pass a name if you want,
but we default to .vm.
That's different from other tools.
And then, you know, the other thing is
when you do UVPIP install,
by default we require a virtual environment.
And so if you do UVPIP install Flask
and there's no virtual environment,
like we'll throw, we'll error.
And it doesn't have to be active.
We'll look for it in the current directory,
even if it's not active.
So like, if you do UVVM, then UVPIP install Flask,
like it will work.
And in my opinion, it will do the intuitive thing,
which is it will install it into the environment
in the current directory.
So it's like, it's trying to provide-
- It'll traverse up?
Like if I'm a little farther down,
it'll go up and say, "Oh, just, oh, that's amazing."
- Exactly.
So it'll find the virtual environment
in the current directory or any parent directory.
So like, for me, that's just like a nice default workflow
that encourages virtual environments
and like doesn't get in your way about it.
And we do have a flag
for installing outside virtual environments,
but the difference is in UV, you have to opt in
if you want to do something like install
into the system Python.
The virtual environment,
it's a very virtual environment first
while abstracting away a lot of the details
of virtual environments.
So, you know, there are things like that
where we made intentional decisions.
- Yeah. - In my opinion, yeah.
- Yeah.
And I think, and it's nice
because we can start with that behavior
and, you know, we're in a privileged position
'cause we can start with different defaults.
- Yeah, for sure.
So if I do, excuse me,
if I do a UV, VNV for a virtual environment,
then maybe I UV pip install something,
but then I forget and I pip install something else.
Does it break?
Is it okay?
- As in the third time there's no UV?
- Well, yeah, exactly.
Like, so I'm in UV pip install something,
UV pip install that.
And I was, oh, I forgot this thing.
I was pip install.
Oh, I forgot the UV.
To the state-- - No, it shouldn't break.
Assuming, so let's say you activate
the virtual environment.
- Yeah, yeah, it's already activated.
- Okay, cool.
So you do UV VM, you activate the virtual environment,
you do UV pip install flask,
and then you do pip install black or whatever.
- Yeah, something, yeah.
- That should work just fine
because like the thing that we ultimately create
in the virtual environment,
like that's all based on standards.
So like the stuff that we do in the virtual environment
to install packages,
it should look like roughly indistinguishable
from what pip would do.
And it's totally interoperable with pip.
So like similarly, if you did pip install
and then like pip install flask
and then UV pip uninstall flask,
like that would work correctly.
Like pip would install flask and we would remove it
because everything that pip and UV are doing
in the virtual environment is based on standards.
So the way that we add and remove packages,
all that kind of stuff,
it should be totally interoperable with other tools.
- Okay, cool.
PyPI is pretty good at having analytics
around what packages are being downloaded,
what's popular, what platforms.
Do you do anything like send a user agent or something
so that people could answer the question
or how many people are using straight pip
and how many people are using UV in a year?
- Yeah, we sent a UV user agent
and it's right now it's just UV in the UV version.
There's an open issue in the repo from Pradyan
who works on pip that outlines all this stuff
that pip includes in its own user agent,
which we wanna add,
which is pretty interesting.
I actually didn't know this.
So pip and its user agent includes a lot of things
about the current Python platform,
data that they use in PyPI basically to inform decisions.
Oh, no one's using Py...
This is just, I don't think this is actually how it's used,
but just an example.
Oh, no one's using Python 3.7 anymore.
Let's lower priority on that
because no one's installing Python with Python 3.7.
And so we wanna add, we don't have that right now.
We're planning to add it.
But yeah, it will be interesting to see.
We can get statistics over time too on UV and pip
and how common they are in different dimensions.
- Yeah.
One thing that would be kind of fun to have is,
I'm not sure if it's at all interesting to you,
but to have some kind of cron job or background thing,
if you just interact with UV,
if it kind of kicked off sort of a background process
that did its thing.
But take the history of maybe the top 500 packages
plus the ones you've used
and just kind of keep a cache up to date on your system.
So you're on an airplane or you're in a coffee shop
or for some reason, the internet's not great.
Like it's kind of pre-filled the cache
and everything's there.
And I kind of, that might be fun.
- Yeah, we do have a --offline flag,
which will like, it forbids network requests obviously,
but it, so like it'll try and do the full install
without accessing the network.
- Yeah, that's cool.
- It would be cool to pre-fill the cache.
- Yeah, but it's just like, you know,
if you're a UV user and you sit down on your computer
and for some reason the internet's out,
I'm at a conference, I'm doing a talk
and it's got the dreaded terrible conference wifi.
It's not the end of your demo.
It's just like, yeah, see how fast this is.
It's amazing.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it was actually, it's actually funny
'cause like the benchmarking, like when we do benchmarks,
like benchmarks can just vary so dramatically
based on like internet connectivity, right?
Like that's often, that is often the bottleneck.
I mean, it's not, it's clearly not always the bottleneck
because we're able to be faster than other tools.
So like if it was always the bottleneck,
I don't think that wouldn't really be true,
but it matters a lot.
And so sometimes I'll throw on, on macOS,
they have a tool called network link conditioner.
So you can actually force-
- Drag your network out.
- Yeah, you can force it down.
And the categories are like,
it's not literally called like bad mobile phone
or something, but it's, that's like basically what it is.
Yeah, it's like, it's like,
it's like very lossy edge network.
Like those are like the pre-built category.
It's pretty funny, but like it is actually,
that's a very helpful thing for benchmarking.
- Yeah.
- And sometimes actually,
if you have a really good network connection,
sometimes it's actually helpful to set that anyway
to a pretty good level,
because then at least it will be like very consistent
across your executions.
Anyway, it's something I've learned over time.
- Yeah, that is super interesting.
So one of the things I think is interesting to consider here
is obviously this is way faster.
I saw some of the announcements
and some of the discussion around the announcements
and the people were really surprised how fast this is.
And I think, I don't think Rust is the full answer.
You mean, you tell me if I'm wrong,
but like one part, obviously making the code run ultra fast,
that is an important part of it.
But it also seems like you all have rethought
some of the internal algorithms and some of the caching
and some of the ways things work,
maybe with a fresh take on it,
or you're not constrained by the way it's been done
for many, many years.
So what elements are at play to make it as fast as it is?
Is it just Rust or is it something else?
- So Rust is important,
but like the way I typically talk about,
like frame it is that Rust is kind of like an enabler
to writing really fast programs.
Like it lets you, it forces you slash lets you care,
it forces you to slash lets you care about certain things
that matter a lot for performance that like in Python,
you just act, there's actually just no way
to care about them.
Like I'm talking specifically here
about like memory allocation,
like in Python that all just kind of happens.
In Rust, you're forced to think about,
am I gonna allocate memory here or not?
And like, when is it gonna be deallocated
and all that kind of stuff.
And so that unlocks the ability to care
and like be really careful in how you manage it.
And so Rust is like a really important,
Rust is an important part of the success story here,
but I think it's like really,
I think it would be really like very incorrect to say
that it's like all about Rust
and it's not a Rust versus Python thing.
Like-- - Right.
Like if we could just recompile pip with--
(laughing)
- Yeah, so if you took--
- With a Cython or something and boom, it would just be,
no, it wouldn't be as big of a deal, right?
- If you took pip and just like rewrote it line by line
as close as you could in Rust,
like it would probably be faster than Pip,
but it would not be nearly as fast as UV.
Like we just do a lot of things differently.
And part of like, I guess evidence for this too,
is like throughout the development of UV,
there were like multiple pull requests
that sped up like UV as a whole by like 30 to 50%.
So what does that say?
That says that like there's lots of different,
those were all Rust programs, right?
So like we were able to write the same Rust program
many times, optimizing it more and more and more.
- Right.
- And so there's like so much engineering
that went into making it fast.
Some of it's like how the cache is designed.
That was like a really important piece.
And that's actually something that like pip could also do.
And I think like it's possible a good outcome here actually
is that like pip is able to take some of these changes
and incorporate them over time.
And we are kind of the Guinea pig for that.
Like we're gonna kind of change user expectations
a little bit about how the cache is set up.
Like we're gonna run into bugs about platform compatibility.
Like we're gonna run into bugs
based on this cache design, right?
And like hopefully that could at some point help inform Pip
if they choose to redesign their cache this way.
The cache design is really big thing.
And then just a lot of like profiling the program,
figuring out what the bottleneck is,
and then like solving the bottleneck
and just like really intense engineering work
that was not me, but it was like other people on the team
to optimize some of that.
Like a good example is, it's okay, it sounds silly,
but like we found that a bottleneck
when all the data is cached
and you're trying to do a resolution.
So there's no network requests, everything's local.
One of the bottlenecks that we kept running into
was parsing and comparing versions, version specifiers.
So like in Python, when you have a requirements file,
you have like FastAPI is greater than version one
or whatever.
And then in the FastAPI file,
you have like FastAPI version 1.0.0, blah, blah, blah.
So like those, like parsing those,
and then we were comparing those.
We were doing comparisons between version markers
like so many times,
because it was just a constant thing
in dependency resolution.
It's like, can I use this dependency?
Well, does it fit to this range?
- So Andrew Gallant from our team,
like rewrote that parser
and the version comparison specifier.
And it's like one of the most incredible pull requests
I've ever seen.
Like it's like so interesting.
Like every commitment is like so interesting.
And he like optimized it so massively that it was like,
he's basically representing the version in the end
by like a 64 bit, like a U64 integer.
And comparisons is just like compare the two integers.
And like, there was just so much engineering
that went into it.
And it sped up the cache case by like 30%.
And so there's a lot of,
there's just a lot of engineering that went into it.
And, you know, again,
it's harder for pip to do some of those things
'cause the code bases,
they have a lot,
they have actual users to support, right?
Like we were able to do this before we launched publicly,
like we could break things,
like we can do things, you know,
we can make massive changes to the code base
in short periods of time.
So, you know, we're in kind of a privileged position
to be able to really optimize the performance like that.
But, you know, it's a big part culturally
of what we wanted to do too,
is like, we're gonna make this thing extremely fast.
- Yeah, I'm seeing also interesting secondary effects,
you know, talks and not, not,
I guess talks, talking about using it, making it faster.
Just now I hear Henry says,
"Build 1.1 is faster from looking at UV."
And the next version will also add UV as an installer choice,
which is pretty impressive.
- Yeah, that's been a really cool,
that's actually something I didn't really anticipate,
but I'm really glad has happened,
which is that there's a little bit of like,
we ended up building something pretty modular.
And so there's been a little bit of,
or a lot of like integrations with UV
that people have been building.
Like, like Bernat had the talks UV thing
that was out like within a week, I think,
which was like use UV to power talks in different ways.
Yeah, Knox, I think supports it, build, pypi/build.
- Ah.
- You know, I've talked to the Hatch maintainer,
you know, like he's pretty interested in making UV
like an optional backend for Hatch.
So like, that's really cool to me
'cause it's all just like magnifying the impact.
And again, I don't know how much of that I anticipated,
but it's really cool to see that like,
you could plug it into these other tools
and they can just like go much faster.
So I don't know, for me, that's been like,
that's actually been like a big highlight
from the release, honestly,
has been the reception from like other maintainers
of other tools who have been excited
to integrate it in different ways.
'Cause it's just not, it just didn't happen.
Like rough wasn't nearly as much of a fit
for that kind of thing.
Like there just aren't as nearly, there are some,
but it's just not as natural to have like integrations
with rough in that way.
But for UV, it makes a lot of sense
and it's been really cool to see.
- Yeah, it's more, UV is more of a building block
than rough is.
Rough fits in editors and CI and stuff.
Yeah, okay.
- There were other tools, but yeah,
it's mostly an end user thing and not a library, I think.
- Right, all right.
So a couple of interesting things out in the audience.
Let's knock them out.
Okay, so Tushar asks, and this is, I think,
a big tension that's building in the Python packaging space
is do packaging tools use Python to do stuff?
Or do the packaging tools control the Python?
Who is controlling whom here?
And so Tushar asks,
will UV also install Python sometime soon?
Can I just express, hey, I wanna use 3.12 on this
in these dependencies?
- Yeah, we almost certainly wanna do this.
I don't think it will be, it won't be required.
Like you can still use your own Python,
but we almost certainly want to add Python bootstrapping.
So like, that's another reason why the dream workflow
is like you use the standalone UV installer
because then it's like,
it will actually install Python for you too.
And so like the reason, so then it's like,
you don't have to have Python on your machine basically
to start being productive with UV.
You can just bootstrap the environment for you.
And we can also do, you know,
yeah, it would just be nice if you did, you know,
pip compile, like UV pip compile,
--Python 3.13 or something.
And then we just like bootstrapped Python 3.13
and did the resolution on your machine.
Like that's kind of the workflow
that we're trying to build towards.
- Yeah, since you're so UV centric as well,
it could be UV, VNV, you know, --version.
- Yeah, a hundred percent.
- 3.12 or whatever.
- And then we bootstrap it, yeah.
- If you don't have, if you've got a cache,
you just give it.
And if you don't, then you get it on the machine.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so we'll definitely do this.
Again, I do think it's important that it's not like required
to use like the UV Pythons.
We actually kind of had to do like a minimal version
of this for our CI and testing.
But it was a batch script
and then I think it became a Python script,
but eventually it would be like built into UV.
Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
I think that would be really.
- Yeah, I think it'll be super cool.
- Really quite awesome.
- Yeah, I think it will be too.
Let's see.
Tushar also says, loves that the --require VNV.
- Yep.
- As a thing.
He thinks it'll become the default
and also points out for those who don't UV
that pip require virtual VNV as an environment flag
is in your RC files.
It's pretty nice.
I need to do that just the other day.
- Yeah, you can.
- Oh, I spelled that to the wrong spot.
- Yeah, so pip can be configured to require virtual ends.
- Yes.
- Yeah, I do something weird.
I'm actually looking at my terminal
behind our shared screen, our meeting here.
And my prompt says global VNV.
And so one of the things that I do is have a,
just if I log it, if I open up my terminal,
it already has an activated virtual environment.
It's just for whatever.
- Oh, interesting.
To just avoid messing up your system Python.
- Just to avoid messing it up.
Or so I can have,
I can just make that virtual environment
the version of Python I want it to be,
even if it's not the system one in general
that I want to set, you know, just like,
it's its own thing.
And so it wouldn't actually help me,
but I still like that.
- That's smart.
Yeah, that's smart.
(laughs)
- Thanks.
- Yeah, I've learned a lot about like, oh my gosh.
I mean, I've learned a lot about packaging.
Like I didn't know like anything about packaging,
you know, like six months ago.
I shouldn't, I should actually shouldn't admit that
'cause it's really bad for my credibility,
but like I've learned a lot about packaging
and in the past like two weeks,
I've also learned a lot about like system Pythons,
like how Python is installed
and like how on like older versions of like Debian,
like Python, they do like a lot of customization to Python
that makes it like really different from like,
and I learned like way more about this
than I ever thought I would.
- I think it's fine to say that.
- I'm out on system Pythons,
but we do support them.
- Yeah, awesome.
You know, someone asked me like,
no, Michael, you must know all of the standard library.
I'm like, what are you crazy?
No.
- Yeah.
- Why would I want to know everything?
Yes, exactly.
And I think it's the same thing about packaging.
There's like so many edge cases.
If you never interact with an edge case
and you don't care about that edge case,
why would you take the week or whatever to study it?
Like it's just, it's irrelevant to you until you need it.
And now you've dove in head first here.
So then you're in the deep end with it.
- We spent so much time.
I shouldn't even bring this up,
but we did, okay, when we were, whatever,
I won't tell the whole story 'cause I need to not,
but like we did consider like lots of different names
for this tool and multiple times we considered a name
and then it turned out to be a standard library module
that none of us had ever used.
Like we wanted to use WAVE, W-A-V-E,
but that's a standard library module.
Yeah, yeah.
I was like, oh, I had no idea.
- Is that for working with WAVE audio files?
Probably it is.
- Yeah, like WAV files, yeah.
- Yeah, interesting.
Yeah, there's a bunch of stuff.
There's a whole demo reason removing certain things
that like, you know, I know it's like a library,
but some of these things I had never seen.
- Yeah, well, it's naming tools and packages
is a whole special deal.
And we have half a million packages in PyPI.
And so how are you gonna not conflict with that?
Have an interesting name.
That's not for, I'm for typo squatting.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Hard, it's a hard problem.
- Yeah, I don't even get me started on name stuff.
Someone actually donated this name to us,
which is very kind of them.
- Oh, that's actually very cool.
Very cool.
All right, one other thing I do wanna talk about here,
Kanishka says, asks about, you know,
is there a future where Rye, R-Y-E,
and UV go hand in hand, also great work,
but maybe just talk a bit about Rye.
That was by Armin Roenicker,
and it kind of had a similar zen as UV,
but really different.
- Yeah, so we, yeah, so we're taking over
like maintainership of Rye,
and we've just been like,
I think I started talking to Armin,
like right after Rye got released,
which was PyCon last year,
I think it was during PyCon it got released.
And we talked like shortly after,
and we just found that like,
we were trying to do a lot of the,
we were trying to solve a lot of the same problems,
and we had like very similar vision
for what we wanted packaging to be.
But like, we were coming at it from very different angles,
like Rye kind of came at it from,
let's solve the Python bootstrapping problem.
So we're gonna ship a Rust tool.
- It's like it's main focus, yeah.
- Yeah, exactly.
And then internally,
it was actually using like pip tools,
and pip to do installs and resolutions.
And then the thing that,
I think the thing that Armin came to realize was like,
if you wanna fulfill this whole vision,
you kind of need to like reinvent a lot of those internals.
And meanwhile, like we were building UV,
which was like basically those internals.
And I was like, we're gonna put a lot of effort
into like building this packaging stack.
And so we kind of found that like,
it was just a really,
we were trying to get to the same place.
And we were putting in a lot of the engineering investment
on building a lot of kind of building blocks.
And we want UV to evolve into something
that could like fully replace Rye.
So we want it to evolve in that direction.
And in the meantime, like we're gonna keep maintaining Rye
and kind of using it as like a little bit of a test bed
for like experimental things,
like Armin added like pytest support to it, for example.
So we're like, we're kind of playing with like,
that's meant to be more of an experimental test bed
for like the future that we wanna achieve.
And over time, we're gonna kind of evolve UV
up to the point that hopefully it can fully replace it.
And then we can provide a clear migration path for it.
So we're gonna keep maintaining it.
It is our intention for UV to like,
to supplant it at some point in the future,
but it'll take us like time for it to get there
and be able to do all the things.
But the visions were just so similar
that it seemed like it made a lot of sense
to try and consolidate and kind of team up on it.
- Yeah, they do seem pretty similar.
And I can see the direction that you're going in it.
It's gonna make them more similar.
- Yeah, I know it'll take time.
And like, you know, this release of UV is like,
it really is like the first release, you know?
It's like, I kind of use some of this stuff
as like pretty low level.
Like we wanna build something that feels higher level
and more automatic in the future.
But these are kind of like the ability to install
and uninstall and resolve packages.
And these were like the fundamental things we needed
and need for anything we were gonna do.
And so this goal was really, let's take those
and let's put them in a form
that's like immediately useful to people.
- Yeah, for sure.
One more Rye question, then I have other questions.
So UV will replace Rye.
Do you recommend using Rye or UV
or what's that side of the story, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It kind of depends on what you're doing.
So like Rye uses UV under the hood.
So like Rye uses UV for resolution and installation.
So if you're using Rye, you're using UV.
I like, I say, I consider UV to be like,
especially if you're like a company or something,
like I would say UV is production ready for you.
Rye, you're buying into a little bit more
of something that's a little bit more experimental.
Like I think Rye is a good fit for like
professional projects, hobby projects,
libraries, smaller projects.
I don't know that I would,
like you're just buying into more change, I think.
- Yeah.
- And so if you're already--
- So if you're a modern repo,
that's got a million lines of code and 110 people on it.
- Yeah, you can certainly try it,
but you should know that you're buying
into something experimental is the way I'd put it.
Whereas UV, like you could also view UV
as experimental if you want.
Like it's very new, right?
Like we've, we're like when we launched, we had,
I mean, I think having issues is actually good
'cause it means people are using your project,
but we had like hundreds of issues
and we closed and we closed,
we've closed like hundreds and hundreds of issues
since we launched.
- Yeah, you guys have been super,
yeah, you've been super responsive on it.
Like you and I've had some exchanges there.
- Yeah, we did.
- And yeah, that's some nice changes I saw going on,
but like I said, almost every day--
- It's just getting like way better.
- It's great.
- Yeah, and it's just getting way, way better.
Like that's the thing about developing in private
is like, like we just, once we released it,
we finally, we actually had users who could use it
and tell us all the things we missed,
tell us all the things we didn't think about.
It's just like every week getting way better.
So like it's getting more and more stable
and like I would use it in production for my stuff,
for sure, and I recommend it for production.
But like Rye is just a little bit of a different story.
I think with Rye, you know,
it's not like we're gonna shut it down tomorrow
or anything like that.
Like it's gonna be,
it's gonna continue to be supported for sure.
But you are, and I think it's branded this way,
which is you're are kind of buying
into a little bit of an experimental tool.
- Yeah, also a bit of a workflow.
- Yeah, it's a very opinionated workflow.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
Whereas you'd use more design
to kind of slot into existing workflows.
- Sure, it's a little more foundational.
Speaking of which, I really like that, you know,
so many of these tools have their own,
their complete own way.
Like I know you're gonna do that,
but we're gonna start up our shell
and then you're gonna run these three commands
and then we're gonna have our own lock file
and we have our own things.
And it's amazing if you drink the Kool-Aid,
if you go all in on the tool.
But if you don't, then it's like,
okay, well, what is this thing even doing?
It's more in my way than it's helping me, you know,
and so on.
So the fact that a lot of this is kind of baking
in the pip-tools way of,
there's gonna be this external tool
that can manage some of your stuff for you,
but it's not prescribing a workflow,
100% props for that, love it.
- Thanks, yeah, I wanted to build something that,
again, I use the word like modular a lot
and I think it can mean different things,
but like, Ruff was kind of like this too.
Like in Ruff, you can use it as like just a linter
or like just a formatter or both.
And like with UV, like you could use UV
like just to create virtual environments
or just to do dependency resolution,
but use pip for your installer or something.
Like it's designed to be kind of flexible
in how you choose to use it.
And I wanna maintain that, you know,
I think we'll start to introduce
more opinionated workflows,
but I think that we'll continue to provide
this kind of pick and choose model as well.
- Yeah, yeah, I think it's great.
It lines right up with the way I do things.
And also I really like it as both someone
who might do presentations either at a conference
or in a course or teaching,
because you're not putting, you know,
the whole virtual environment stuff
is already such a kind of a large barrier
that comes a little early in people's learning path, right?
They're like, I wanna run Python, I wanna run this thing.
Whoa, you don't just install this, you don't just use it.
We're gonna talk about virtual environments.
Like, I don't care about those, I just wanna run it.
Like, but you're gonna need to install something.
So here we go.
Right, adding more workflow
and more specific ways of working there,
I think while trying to help a lot of times
they end up just adding more friction at the start.
- Yeah, yeah.
And like, I guess my philosophy there is like,
I want us to like embrace virtual environments.
I think Rai has this philosophy too,
which is like Rai does use virtual environments.
And like virtual environments actually have a lot of,
there's a lot of benefits to embracing them.
Like all the editors and such,
they're all built around virtual,
they all are all built around virtual environment detection
and stuff like that.
But I wanted to feel, I wanted to feel a little, honestly,
like it has a really bad reputation,
but I wanted to feel more like node modules, you know?
- Yeah, I agree.
- It just kind of works in your,
it just kind of sits in your project
and your project just does the right thing.
And I know people make fun of node modules
usually for being big,
but like, but that's the developer experience I want,
which is you don't think of the virtual environment
as this weird other thing.
It's just kind of like the project environment
and it just kind of works.
And I think, I think you get that by not like
fielding people from it,
but abstracting some of it away
for people that don't need to think about it.
- Yeah, there was a, there was an amazing,
it's not a joke, but it's, I guess,
something that's a prank that somebody came up with.
Here, I'll put it on the screen.
It's called "When Everything Becomes Too Much,"
the NPM package chaos of 2024.
And I was just, as you were talking about node modules,
this is more of a- - Oh my gosh.
I haven't seen this.
- It's amazing.
So it's more of a statement of like,
well, how super interdependent
or how many combinatorial or transitive dependencies
does a couple of NPM things have?
Like, for example, I used Tailwind,
but there was maybe 50 things in my node module
for just using Tailwind in my project, right?
So anyway, this one is,
an NPM user named PatrickJS launched a troll campaign
where a package called everything,
it depended on every other NPM package.
So if you, you know, NPM install everything,
they literally try to download the repository.
- Yeah, that's kind of amazing.
Wow. - I know.
It's devious, but it's also kind of like,
okay, that's something else.
- Yeah, and Python and dependency trees
tend to be much, like, shorter, I guess, and like smaller.
Like, you tend to have way fewer dependencies.
They are sometimes like heavier, I guess,
'cause like in Python,
it's very common to have lots of native code.
And like, I don't know, like PyTorch,
like the PyTorch wheels that you download
when they're zipped are like between 100 and 200 megabytes.
- Wow, okay. - And like, yeah, yeah.
Like all the ML stuff and all the native stuff,
like those are like big,
but the number of dependencies tends to be a lot smaller.
- Yeah, I totally agree.
- It's also very common to ship like foundational packages
with like no dependencies or very few dependencies,
which is very hard to do in JavaScript.
- Yeah, it is.
It definitely is.
All right, I think we're getting short on time here.
I think I probably should let you go back
and knock out another release of UV.
- I do have a new release today.
Okay, thank you. - Awesome.
(laughing)
So Tony, all the audience has been using UV
in production for a couple of weeks now.
Also, seems very excited about it.
And also, I have two.
It's an absolute delight.
It hasn't, I know there were certain,
yeah, I know there are certain things
that it didn't do like right away,
but then it came out and you added them quickly.
I know there was some criticism for you all
for developing this in private and then releasing it.
And I just wanna say like, you know, thanks for doing that.
And what's the alternative?
You start with just a blank GitHub repo
and people start to say, well, you should do this.
You should be doing that.
Like, we have a vision.
Let us just like get it a little structure in place
and then we'll open source it.
Like give us a month, you know?
So I don't know.
I think it's excellent work you're doing.
- I appreciate it.
I appreciate it.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, like I said at the start,
it's different this time because anything we release,
like, you know.
- You can work on a rough for a month
and nobody cares until it starts to catch some traction.
Right?
But this is the instant that it hits.
- Yeah, we knew people would at least look at it
and at least try it.
And I think, you know, we wanted to make sure
that whatever we released, first of all, was good.
And second of all, that we were ready to maintain it.
And I think with packaging too, it's like,
there's just a lot of, it's just such a complex space
that like, I wanted to make sure
that we had a lot of clarity in the messaging
around what the tool is and what it's not
and like what we want it to be and what it isn't yet.
And so I'm really happy with how the launch went
and I've really appreciated just all the excitement,
activity, engagement that we've had on the repo.
It's been like, I don't know.
I mean, honestly, it's been a lot of work.
But it's like really, really, no, but it's awesome.
It's like so energizing for me and for the team.
- And to see all the people picking it up
and making it the foundation of their projects.
And yeah, it's really cool.
- Yeah, and it's cool.
You know, I guess another, like one other thing
that's a little different this time is like,
I talk, I just talked to more people
who work on Python tooling at companies now
than I did when I released Ruff,
just 'cause over the course of the past year,
I've just met a lot of people
and we've just talked about how they're using Ruff,
how they're not.
And so just hearing some of those stories too
of how like companies are starting to use it
and like what the blockers are
and like how much of a speed up it's providing
has been pretty cool to see too.
So yeah, I know I appreciate it though.
- Yeah, you're welcome.
All right, we'll leave with this final thought from Juan.
I installed 94 libraries in around two seconds.
Incredible. - That's great.
- All right.
(laughing)
All right, well, I'm excited to see where things go
and you know, we'll maybe do a follow-up
when you've got some more of the ideas in place.
- Sounds great.
No, it's always a pleasure.
Thanks so much for having me on.
I really appreciate it.
- Yeah, thanks Charlie.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me.
Thank you to our sponsors.
Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
It's time to stop asking relational databases
to do more than they were made for
and simplify complex data models with graphs.
Check out the sample FastAPI project
and see what Neo4j, a native graph database can do for you.
Find out more at talkpython.fm/neo4j.
Want to level up your Python?
We have one of the largest catalogs
of Python video courses over at Talk Python.
Our content ranges from true beginners
to deeply advanced topics like memory and async.
And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm.
Be sure to subscribe to the show.
Open your favorite podcast app and search for Python.
We should be right at the top.
You can also find the iTunes feed at /iTunes,
the Google Play feed at /play,
and the direct RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm.
We're live streaming most of our recordings these days.
If you want to be part of the show
and have your comments featured on the air,
be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel
at talkpython.fm/youtube.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it.
Now get out there and write some Python code.
(upbeat music)
Here's what's next!